+++
widget = "pages"  # See https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/page-builder/
headless = true  # This file represents a page section.
active = true  # Activate this widget? true/false
weight = 51  # Order that this section will appear.

title = "Press"
subtitle = "Interviews and media mentions"

[content]
  # Page type to display. E.g. post, talk, or publication.
  page_type = "publication"
  
  # Choose how much pages you would like to display (0 = all pages)
  count = 5 
  
  # Choose how many pages you would like to offset by
  offset = 0

  # Page order. Descending (desc) or ascending (asc) date.
  order = "desc" 

  # Filter posts by a taxonomy term.
  [content.filters]
    tag = ""
    category = ""
    publication_type = ""
    exclude_featured = false
  
[design]
  # Toggle between the various page layout types.
  #   1 = List
  #   2 = Compact
  #   3 = Card
  #   4 = Citation (publication only)
  view = 2
  
[design.background]
  # Apply a background color, gradient, or image.
  #   Uncomment (by removing `#`) an option to apply it.
  #   Choose a light or dark text color by setting `text_color_light`.
  #   Any HTML color name or Hex value is valid.
    
  # Background color.
  # color = "navy"
  
  # Background gradient.
  # gradient_start = "DeepSkyBlue"
  # gradient_end = "SkyBlue"
  
  # Background image.
  # image = "background.jpg"  # Name of image in `static/img/`.
  # image_darken = 0.6  # Darken the image? Range 0-1 where 0 is transparent and 1 is opaque.

  # Text color (true=light or false=dark).
  # text_color_light = true  
  
[advanced]
 # Custom CSS. 
 css_style = ""
 
 # CSS class.
 css_class = ""
+++

28 Feb 2022 **Cut the tyranny of copy-and-paste with these coding tools.** by Jeffrey M. Perkel, published in [_Nature_](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-00563-z). "Ben Marwick, an archaeologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, has written “around a dozen” papers using R Markdown. He says that the workflow dovetails with his broader interest in open science and scientific transparency. Data science, he says, involves multiple “very small decisions” — data cleaning and filtering steps, for instance, which are crucially important, but difficult to document. And journal page limits preclude exposition. But by blending code, data and text in a single document, researchers can show just how their results were generated. “It’s an extremely efficient way to communicate as much of the process as we can,” Marwick says. ... “The inline code just completely allows you to sleep well at night,” Marwick says."

1 Sept 2021 **Over 6,300 artifacts excavated at Yen Bai’s archaeological site** in [Vietnam+](https://en.vietnamplus.vn/over-6300-artifacts-excavated-at-yen-bais-archaeological-site/207331.vnp). A brief summary of our 2015 archaeological excavations in Mau A in Yen Bai Province, Vietnam. "If the hypothesis that this is the area of prehistoric people can be proven, this will be very important information, marking a big change in the production organisation and division of labour of prehistoric people, according to Dr. Ben Marwick"

10 Dec 2020 **[Tea & Trowels: Ep. 38 Open science in archaeology is important for decolonizing archaeology](https://youtu.be/VWDXSGYc800)** interview by Emily Jane Murray for the [Florida Public Archaeology Network - Northeast Region](http://www.flpublicarchaeology.org/nerc) "It's tea time! Join us as Emily Jane chats locally crafted Japanese gardening tools, open science and epic archaeology fails caught on film with Dr. Ben Marwick of the University of Washington. [#TeaAndTrowels](https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/teaandtrowels)"

30 Nov 2020 **UW launches new interdisciplinary data science minor** by Julia Park, in [The Daily of the University of Washington](http://www.dailyuw.com/news/article_a5f66214-32e6-11eb-9ed2-b7a1dfdc126c.html) "Ben Marwick, associate professor of archaeology and director of the minor, said the program is unique because it provides training in both “data skills,” such as programming languages or machine learning, and “data studies,” which examine the decisions, ethics, and implications surrounding data in the real world. ... Graduates of the program “will go out into the workplace and they'll be ready to talk in a really sensitive, meaningful way when some engineer is saying, ‘Oh, we just can do this and that with the data and then we'll be great,’” Marwick said. “And then our graduate will say, ‘Well, let’s just think about this for a minute: Who's going to benefit, who's going to suffer? Is this the right thing to do, and what is the impact on the community of doing this or that?’"

30 Nov 2020 **Conversations in Human Evolution: Volume 1** edited by Lucy Timbrell, published by [Archaeopress](http://archaeopress.com/Public/displayProductDetail.asp?id={9EC3227C-1A17-48FB-A713-98E8CDB7BCE1}) 'Conversations in Human Evolution is an ongoing science communication initiative seeking to explore the breadth and interdisciplinarity of human evolution studies. This volume reports twenty interviews (referred to as ‘conversations’ as they are informal in style) with scholars at the forefront of human evolution research, covering the broad scientific themes of quaternary and archaeological science, Palaeolithic archaeology, biological anthropology and palaeoanthropology, primatology and evolutionary anthropology and evolutionary genetics. This project features academics at various different stages in their careers and from all over the world; in this volume alone, researchers are based at institutions in seven different countries (namely the United Kingdom, Australia, the United States of America, Germany, Denmark, India, and China), covering four continents.' Includes an interview with Ben Marwick, previously published online at Lucy's [Conversations in Human Evolution](https://conversationsinhumanevolution.wordpress.com/2020/07/21/conversations-with-professor-ben-marwick/) project.

26 Nov 2020 **Looking back on ARCHON Day 2020** by Ela Altay for [ARCHON Research School of Archaeology (Netherlands)](https://www.archonline.nl/october-2020/looking-back-on-archon-day-2020/) "The [ARCHON Day 2020](https://www.archonline.nl/october-2020/archon-day-2020-online/) took place on 30 October 2020 as an online event. Students and professional researchers virtually came together to talk about this year’s central topic: 'Advancing access to Research'... The poster session was followed by a [keynote lecture](https://t.co/ETUYHXLM1S), titled 'Open access, open data and open methods – three steps to transparency that are redefining archaeological science' given by Ben Marwick. He gave insight in the benefits and importance of these methods, which included both private and public ones. Needless to say, these benefits required individual effort. Marwick defined all three to be 'free, immediate and online'." 

18 Nov 2020 **UW introduces new minor in data science** by Jackson Holtz for [UW News](https://www.washington.edu/news/2020/11/18/uw-introduces-new-minor-in-data-science/) "'The goal is to combine some of the technical skills that relate to the new developments of generating and analyzing large amounts of data. And then giving students the context and the critical thinking skills to do something meaningful with that,' said Ben Marwick, an associate professor of archaeology and director of the new data science minor. 'Data science education must distinguish itself by closely coupling the teaching of methods, tools, applications and meta-examination of data science practice,' Marwick said."

1 October 2020 **Guest Editorial** by 
Paromita Bose, Sutonuka Bhattacharya, Prachi Joshi, Mokshada Salunke, and Chintan Thakar, published in [_Antiquity_](https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2020.179) "As well as research presentations, we also scheduled a training session for the participants of the conference. The programming language R is now widely used for data analysis in the social and natural sciences, including archaeology. In India, however, at least in the context of archaeological analysis, the use of R is unknown. As part of the conference, we therefore held an ‘Introduction to R in archaeology’ workshop, organised in collaboration with the Sharma Centre. The workshop was led by Dr Ben Marwick of the University of Washington. As the first R training session for archaeologists to be held in India, the workshop was literally aimed at taking data analysis in Indian archaeology into the future. The interactive session included both theoretical and ‘hands-on’ training to develop conceptual and practical software skills, and there were many questions and much lively discussion. With this new experience of using R, it is now up to us as individual researchers to develop and make use of these skills in our future work."

21 July 2020 **Conversations with: Professor Ben Marwick** by Lucy Timbrell, published in [_Conversations in Human Evolution_](https://conversationsinhumanevolution.wordpress.com/2020/07/21/conversations-with-professor-ben-marwick/) "I am delighted to introduce today Professor Ben Marwick, an archaeologist from the University of Washington! Specifically, Ben‘s research interests are focussed within Southeast Asian and Australian archaeology, such as hominin dispersals, forager technologies and ecology. He also is interested in how archaeology engages with local and online communities, in addition to popular culture, as well as techniques and methods for reproducible research and open science."

21 Jan 2020 **Ancient aboriginal aquaculture system older than Stonehenge uncovered by Australia wildfires** by Kim Bellware, published in [_The Washington Post_](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2020/01/21/budj-bim-wildfire/) and the [_Smithsonian Magazine_](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/australian-bushfires-uncover-hidden-sections-ancient-aquaculture-system-180974028/) by Theresa Machemer "You don’t really see it anywhere else in Australia until European agriculture," Ben Marwick, an associate professor of archaeology for the University of Washington, told The Washington Post. "It shows us they had a high level of technical skill, understanding of physics and of the natural environment." ... "It was known about for a long time but ignored," Marwick said. "It ran counter to prevailing narrative about the aboriginal people and didn’t fit the stereotype that the Europeans were more sophisticated." Marwick, the professor, grew up in Australia and said Budj Bim is "one of the jewels of the crown of Australian archaeology." ... "We know the population was twice the size of what we originally thought, but we might have to size up from that estimate again,” he said. "There’s a stereotype of an unchanging land and an unchanging people, but this shows this really isn’t the case; they appear to have continually modified the system," Marwick said. "It’s a nice case study for the change in attitude toward aboriginal culture and how undervalued it is, especially by white Australians." 

5 Nov 2019 **Make code accessible with these cloud services** by Jeffrey M. Perkel, published in [_Nature_](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-03366-x). "Marwick, an archaeologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, had become proficient in migrating Docker configuration files (‘Dockerfiles’) from one project to the next, making minor tweaks and getting them to work. Colleagues in Germany invited him to teach their students how to follow suit. But because every student had a slightly different set of hardware and software installed, each one required a customized configuration. The demo “was a complete disaster”, Marwick says."

29 Aug 2019 **Crowdsourced archaeology shows how humans have influenced Earth for thousands of years** by Kim Eckart, published in [UW News](https://www.washington.edu/news/2019/08/29/crowdsourced-archaeology-shows-how-humans-have-influenced-earth-for-thousands-of-years/). "There are archaeologists working all over the world, but they aggregate data differently, and it can be difficult to find larger patterns," said co-author Ben Marwick, an associate professor of anthropology at the UW. "By asking archaeologists a series of questions rather than combining datasets, we’ve created a brilliant workaround — essentially, what were people doing, and how much, in different parts of the world? ... A global dataset like this invites lots of interesting follow-up investigations that have not been possible before now. With all our data openly available, anyone anywhere can freely dig in and test out new ideas on a global scale", Marwick said.

18 Jun 2019 **A “petting zoo for code” makes studies easier to reproduce: A new tool helps users to compose, compute and publish reproducible articles.** by Jeffrey M. Perkel, published in [_Nature Index_](https://www.natureindex.com/news-blog/a-petting-zoo-for-code-makes-studies-easier-to-reproduce). "The result, says Ben Marwick, an archeologist and reproducibility advocate at the University of Washington in Seattle, who has used Code Ocean to publish his computing environments, is like a computational “petting zoo” -- a platform for making code and data available to the scientific community for interactive exploration, validation and modification."

25 May 2019. **OPP Interviews: Jade d’Alpoim Guedes and Ben Marwick**, by Emerson Del Ponte and Adam Sparks for the [Open Plant Pathology (OPP) Blog](https://openplantpathology.org/post/2019-05-25-interview-jade-ben/). "My awareness of the importance of doing reproducible research came pretty late – well after I’d finished my PhD and started working as a professor. I needed some time to acquire the necessary basic skills, and to build up the courage to work differently from my peers and senior colleagues, and to be able to tell them that there might be better ways to do research. Most of my reproducible practices are self-taught by adopting practices I’ve observed in elsewhere, such as ecology and biology."

5 Mar 2019 **EP015 Reproducible Research in Archaeology with rrtools** Podcast interview by David Brassard and Patrick Diehl for [Free/Libre and Open Source Software (FLOSS) for Science](https://flossforscience.com/podcast/season-2-episode-3) "For episode 15, we interview the Associate Professor of Archaeology Ben Marwick. We start our discussion with an overview of some FLOSS tools he uses and how much FLOSS are used in archaeology. He shares with us his experience in regard to working completely in the open with GitHub and his hope that open science will become the norm in the future. We also discuss about rrtools and his propositions on how to greatly improve the reproducibility of science. As a closing though he shares with us his arguments why early career researchers should invest time to learn and transition to FLOSS tools."

19 Nov 2018 **Reinventing the Wheel? Early Humans Invented Prehistoric ‘Swiss Army Knife’ Everywhere They Lived** by  Ruth Schuster, published in [_Haaretz_](https://www.haaretz.com/archaeology/MAGAZINE-early-humans-invented-high-tech-stone-tools-more-than-once-study-suggests-1.6662192). 'Levallois (pronounced Le-val-wa) takes brains and finesse. This type of implement – “the Swiss Army knife of prehistoric tools,” Marwick calls them – required planning.'... '"It seems plausible because we have a well documented case in Armenia," notes Marwick, who agrees that, theoretically, Homo erectus could have been the ancient inventor. "But we would need to see the artifacts combined with some hominin bones, fossils, before we can be confident. Until then, all we can do is speculate," he tells Haaretz.'... 'At least in Morocco, it was apparently being used by some kind of Homo sapiens, since we see the tools and human bones together at Jebel Irhoud, Marwick tells Haaretz. “Later, they are also used by Neanderthals in Europe.”' ... 'But the discovery of Levallois technology in so many places, from so many times, leads to thoughts that it originated independently in more than one spot, which is the point of the new paper. “The evidence is accumulating in support of that scenario,” says Marwick.' ... '“East Asia is an exciting and challenging area to study human evolution. So much of the world’s current population live there, but we know so little about how they got there,” he says. “Compared to Africa and Europe, we have not had as much time or resources to find evidence in Asia. But we’re catching up, because the evidence is increasingly showing that this region is an important and unique part of the story of how we became human.”'

19 Nov 2018 **The ‘Swiss Army knife of prehistoric tools’ found in Asia, independent of ancient African or European influence** by Kim Eckart for [UW News](https://www.washington.edu/news/2018/11/19/the-swiss-army-knife-of-prehistoric-tools-found-in-asia-independent-of-ancient-african-or-european-influence/) "It used to be thought that Levallois cores came to China relatively recently with modern humans,” said Ben Marwick, UW associate professor of anthropology and one of the paper’s corresponding authors. “Our work reveals the complexity and adaptability of people there that is equivalent to elsewhere in the world. It shows the diversity of the human experience."

26 Oct 2018 **The oldest weapons in North America offer a new view of prehistoric tech** by By Neel V. Patel for [Popular Science](https://www.popsci.com/oldest-weapons-north-america-spear-points/). “I think they’ve done an amazing job in dating the deposits in the artifacts” and providing a “secure chronology,” says Ben Marwick, an archeologist based at the University of Washington who was not involved with the study. “They’ve invested a lot of effort and it’s paid off very well, and I really think that’s a strength of the study.” That being said, Marwick also points out the findings have their limits. “The critical artifacts [the authors] based their findings on are small in number. It leaves an unanswered question of whether this is a real pattern of an early technology we don’t know much about, or if it’s just a one-off sort of thing, and maybe there’s just a small number of people deciding to make these sorts of artifacts one afternoon.”  Marwick also notes there’s not a very robust description of the actual clay deposits in the paper, and that pictures seemed to show some vertical cracks in the layers. “It looks like there might be some potential for some of these artifacts to move through the cracks. It’s possible some of the artifacts might have moved down,” and are not as old as we might really believe. Marwick has conducted work in similar archeological sites in Australia, where he and his team have had to anticipate those sorts of possibilities and account for them through microscopic analysis and other testing. “My sense is that that work hasn’t been done here, and I’d look forward to seeing some of that before I get too excited about some of the claims.” Lastly, while Marwick says it’s possible the points originate from a separate group of migrants, he’s hesitant to put too much stock in that interpretation. “We know that one group can make many different kinds of artifacts. It’s not always really the case that different kinds of artifacts mean different kinds of cultural groups.” There are only a handful of sites within North America that scientists are able to work with, so it’s difficult to come up with conclusions that will apply wholesale to the history of early human migrants in North America. He’s hopeful more research can prove whether or not these kinds of findings are part of a pattern or just a kind of random peculiarity in the field of anthropology. Nevertheless, Marwick is encouraged by the overall implication of the findings that early technologies in the Americas are more diverse than we previously thought. “It’s a very important part of this new paper,” he says. 

6 Sept 2018 **Open framework tackles backwards science.** by Jeffrey M. Perkel, published in [_Nature Index_](https://www.natureindex.com/news-blog/open-framework-tackles-backwards-science). "Marwick says [the] ability to integrate multiple online systems is one of the "strong attractions" of the OSF. Another, he says, is its integrated preprint server. OSF preprints can be associated with projects, providing an easy way to migrate back and forth between a project's data and the resulting manuscripts."

22 Aug 2018 **A toolkit for data transparency takes shape: A simple software toolset can help to ease the pain of reproducing computational analyses.** by Jeffrey M. Perkel, published in [_Nature_](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05990-5) 560, 513-515. "Marwick says '...tantalizing connections lie abandoned because they’re impossible to explore. It’s like we’re a roomful of hungry people handing around tins of canned food, and nobody has a can opener. And then we’re asking each other, why doesn’t anyone eat anything?'"

9 Apr 2018 **A finger bone from an unexpected place and time upends the story of human migration out of Africa** by Karen Kaplan in the [Los Angeles Times](https://www.latimes.com/science/sciencenow/la-sci-sn-human-finger-fossil-20180409-story.html) “What makes the Al Wusta find especially important is that it is a direct date on a bone,” [Ben] said. “Most of the other evidence that support this pre-65,000 year idea have not been able to directly date human bones.” However, he said, he wished that the authors had been more open about sharing their raw data and methods, to allow other members of the archaeological and anthropological community to verify their discovery. “It would be ideal to see some independent validation of the ages by another lab, unrelated to these authors, dating samples from the bone,” Marwick said. “That would help to confirm that the result is reproducible, which is the cornerstone of any scientific claim.”

8 Mar 2018 **Solving the mysteries of prehistoric blades: Ancient weapons are found to have specific functions in hunting**, by Cristen Jansson in the [The Daily](https://www.dailyuw.com/science/article_3edf2704-2287-11e8-b5d1-fb7fa957ae56.html), Ben Marwick, an associate professor of anthropology at the UW who was not involved in the [study](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2017.10.006), says that the archaeologists based their conclusions about the origins of these blades purely on logic. “A bone is a round, thin object, and if you sharpen it, you can penetrate very deeply into something,” Marwick said. “The stone point will have a different property because it’s wide and flat and so it can tear the flesh more, and the composite tool [microblade] is kind of jagged and bulky." Marwick said this paper proves “these different types of tool really have these properties when hunting... Although [the] focus was just on people in Alaska... I think it‘s relevance can go far beyond that,” Marwick said. “In Australia, for example, we also find bone points and composite tools and stone artifacts there, so it helps us to try to understand the role of those tools in people’s toolkits. It can [also] be relevant to understanding the first appearance of these tools in the whole history of human evolution... Using a composite tool is much less risky, because if you [miss the animal]or something bad happens, you can repair it, but if you just have a single stone point, the risk [of irreparable damage] is quite high,” Marwick said.

6 Dec 2017 **Making YOUR Code Reproducible: Tips and Tricks**, by Chris Grieves in the [Methods.blog](https://methodsblog.com/2017/12/06/making-your-code-reproducible/), the official blog of the journal _Methods in Ecology and Evolution_. "When we were putting together the British Ecological Society’s Guide to Reproducible Code we asked the community to send us their advice on how to make code reproducible. We got a lot of excellent responses and we tried to fit as many as we could into the Guide. Unfortunately, we ran out of space and there were a few that we couldn’t include. Luckily, we have a blog where we can post all of those tips and tricks so that you don’t miss out." The blog post features five quotations from me relating to the British Ecological Society's [Guide to Reproducible Code](http://bit.ly/BESGuidesTo).

26 Oct 2017 **How I Work Open: Ben Marwick** by Liz Bedford, a blog post for the [Scholarly Communication & Publishing Department at the University of Washington Libraries](https://blogs.uw.edu/openpub/2017/10/26/how-i-work-open-ben-marwick/) "While part of my archaeology work consists of traditional activities like excavation, fieldwork, and surveying, another is part is computer-based. Much of my effort is focused on making the computational work done in the lab open and transparent, because in the field what we’re doing is automatically open."

19 July 2017 **Artifacts suggest humans arrived in Australia earlier than thought** by Kim Eckart for [UW News](https://www.washington.edu/news/2017/07/19/artifacts-suggest-humans-arrived-in-australia-earlier-than-thought/) "Now, a team of researchers, including a faculty member and seven students from the University of Washington, has found and dated artifacts in northern Australia that indicate humans arrived there about 65,000 years ago — more than 10,000 years earlier than previously thought. A paper published July 20 in the journal Nature describes dating techniques and artifact finds at Madjedbebe, a longtime site of archaeological research, that could inform other theories about the emergence of early humans and their coexistence with wildlife on the Australian continent."

25 May 2017 **UW anthropologist: Why researchers should share computer code** by Kim Eckart for [UW News](https://www.washington.edu/news/2017/05/25/uw-anthropologist-why-researchers-should-share-computer-code/) "Making the programs behind the research accessible allows other scientists to test the code and reproduce the computations in an experiment — in other words, to reproduce results and solidify findings. It’s the “how the sausage is made” part of research, Marwick said. It also allows the code to be used by other researchers in new studies, making it easier for scientists to build on the work of their colleagues."

23 Mar 2017 **Open Science w/ Ben Marwick - Episode 49** Podcast interview by Chris Webster and Christopher Sims for [ArchaeoTech](https://www.archaeologypodcastnetwork.com/archaeotech/49) "Dr. Ben Marwick returns to talk about the Open Science Interest Group, his recent publication on technology and open archaeology, and his workshop at the SAA Annual Meeting in Vancouver."

17 Nov 2016 **Ben Marwick and Coding at SAA2017 - Episode 40** Podcast interview by Chris Webster and Christopher Sims for [ArchaeoTech](https://www.archaeologypodcastnetwork.com/archaeotech/40) "On today's episode we talk to Ben Marwick. Ben has started a forum and a workshop for the 2017 Society for American Archaeology meetings in Vancouver, Canada. We talk about coding and what they're going to do at the forum and the workshop. It's a new kind of session and we're excited to help announce it."

16 April 2016 **Journal buoys code-review push** by Erika Check Hayden, published in [_Nature_](https://www.nature.com/news/polopoly_fs/1.17323!/menu/main/topColumns/topLeftColumn/pdf/520276a.pdf?origin=ppub) 520, 276-277."Another is social: there is no etiquette governing how those who wish to replicate results should behave towards those whose work they examine. If authors of erroneous studies face public embarrassment and shaming, that can discourage other researchers from submitting to the same scrutiny. “It’s like taking your clothes off; you don’t want to be embarrassed by someone pointing at you because you have a lot of body hair,” says Ben Marwick,"

17 April 2010 **Australian Archaeology and Rabbit Warrens** Podcast interview by Diana O'Carroll and Duncan Howitt-Marshall for [Naked Archaeology](https://www.thenakedscientists.com/podcasts/archive/naked-archaeology/australian-archaeology-and-rabbit-warrens). "This month on Naked Archaeology: when and how did the first humans make it to Australia? We unearth the evidence from archaeology and genetics. Also this month we discover that Neanderthals could be relations of ours, after all. Plus, in Back Yard Archaeology Diana ventures into her own back yard to find out what was so special about rabbit warrens"


  
